.. _changelog-6.3.2:

SIMP Community Edition (CE) 6.3.2-0
===================================

.. raw:: pdf

  PageBreak

.. contents::
  :depth: 2

.. raw:: pdf

  PageBreak

.. WARNING::

   Please see the :ref:`changelog-6.2.0` Changelog for general information,
   upgrade guidance, and compatibility notes.

This is a bug fix release in the 6.3.X series of SIMP to address the following
issues:

  * `SIMP-5974`_: Ensure that the ``incron`` spawned ``puppet generate types``
    would not overwhelm the puppet server due to an `upstream bug in the incron
    package`_.  This involved both pinning the incron version to a version that
    did not have bugs as well as reducing the footprint of the monitored files
    in the filesystem. See :ref:`faq-puppet-generate_types` for additional
    information.

    * The version of ``incron`` that shipped with SIMP 6.3.0 did not have
      issues, but the update in upstream EPEL did and affects **all uses of
      incron**, not just ``pupmod::master::generate_types``. We strongly advise
      that you remove the ``0.5.12-6`` package from your upstream repositories
      and use the following Hiera configuration to ensure that your SIMP
      ``6.3.0-0`` installation does not upgrade.

      .. code-block:: yaml

         ---
         yum::config_options:
           exclude="incron"

      .. WARNING::

         If you previously disabled ``pupmod::master::generate_types`` then be
         advised that you will need to manually run ``puppet generate types``
         on your environments if you upgrade the ``puppet`` or ``puppetserver``
         packages or if you add a new environment to your system.

         See the :ref:`faq-puppet-generate_types` for additional information.

   * `SIMP-5480`_: Fix a bug in the default ``sssd settings`` where the minimum
     allowed ``uid/gid`` is now ``1`` and the maximum allowed ``uid/gid`` is
     now ``0`` to align properly with the ``sssd`` functionality.

   * `SIMP-5932`_: Allow users to specify a timeout for ``simp bootstrap`` to
     address slow systems.

   * `SIMP-5975`_: Allow users to specify SSL settings for the puppet server.

Fixed Bugs
----------

pupmod-simp-incron
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Add ``Incron::Mask`` Data Type denoting valid incron masks
* Added support for new options starting in ``0.5.12``

  * Automatically strip out options not supported by earlier versions for
    seamless backward compatibility

* Add ability to set ``max_open_files`` ulimit
* Pin incron to ``0.5.10`` via data in modules since ``0.5.12`` as currently
  published in EPEL can cause catastrophic system failure.

pupmod-simp-pupmod
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Fixed issues where a large number of ``incron`` watches may overload the
  system.

  * The module is now extensively tested against large numbers of environments
    but will still cause load if a large number of environments are created at
    once.

* Fixed a bug where some SSL settings could not be set in the puppetserver
  ``webserver`` components.
* Added the following *advanced usage* parameters in case users need to set
  parameters that are not presently managed to work around future issues:

  * ``pupmod::master::server_webserver_options``
  * ``pupmod::master::ca_webserver_options``

pupmod-simp-simplib
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Ensure that IPA fact does not hang indefinitely.
* Added 'defined type' lookup capability, ``simplib::dlookup`` that provides a
  consistent method for rerieving defined type parameters from Hiera in an
  opt-in manner. (Required for fixing the ``stunnel`` bug).
* Fixed YARD documentation issues

pupmod-simp-sssd
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Set the ``min_id`` settings across the board to ``1`` to match the sssd
  defaults, since they really have nothing to do with the target system's
  relationship with a centralized authentication service.
* The original setting of the ``min_id`` or ``max_id`` settings to the
  ``login.defs`` defaults was a bug since, per the man page, this would
  preclude sssd from recognizing items outside of that range at all. The
  relevance of the ``local login.defs`` settings (system specific) and the sssd
  settings (global authentication source) are completely irrelevant to one
  another and should not have been bound together.
* Updated the ``sssd::provider::ldap_access_order`` parameter to support the
  ``ppolicy`` related options that were added in sssd ``1.14.0``.

  * ppolicy
  * pwd_expire_policy_reject
  * pwd_expire_policy_warn
  * pwd_expire_policy_renew

* Added ``pwd_expire_policy_reject`` to the
  ``sssd::provider::ldap::ldap_access_order`` default. This will deny a locked
  account even it access is being attempted via a SSH key.

pupmod-simp-stunnel
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Add ability for users to override ``stunnel::connection`` and
  ``stunnel::instance`` options either globally or by specific indentified
  instances using the new ``simplib::dlookup`` function.
* Fixed ``stunnel::connection`` and ``stunnel::instance`` bugs:

  * ``sni`` is not applicable on EL6
  * ``retry`` is ony applicable when ``exec`` is specified and needed to be
    translated from a booolean to ``yes/no``
  * ``session`` is only applicable on EL6

rubygem_simp_cli
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added a ``simp bootstrap`` option to set the wait time for the puppetserver
  to start during the bootstrap process.
* Adjusted the help message so that it fits within a 80-character console
  window.

Known Bugs
----------

Upgrading from previous SIMP 6.X versions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are known issues when upgrading from Puppet 4 to Puppet 5.  Make sure you
read the :ref:`ug-upgrade-simp` before attempting an upgrade.

Tlog
^^^^

Tlog currently has `a bug where session information may not be logged`_. The
immediate mitigation to this is the fact that `pam_tty_audit` is the primary
mode of auditing with ``tlog`` and/or ``sudosh`` being in place for a better
overall tracking and behavior analysis experience.

Tlog has `a second bug where the application fails if a user does not have a TTY`_.
This has been mitigated by the SIMP wrapper script simply bypassing ``tlog`` if
a TTY is not present.


.. _SIMP-5480: https://simp-project.atlassian.net/browse/SIMP-5480
.. _SIMP-5932: https://simp-project.atlassian.net/browse/SIMP-5932
.. _SIMP-5974: https://simp-project.atlassian.net/browse/SIMP-5974
.. _SIMP-5975: https://simp-project.atlassian.net/browse/SIMP-5975
.. _a bug where session information may not be logged: https://github.com/Scribery/tlog/issues/228
.. _a second bug where the application fails if a user does not have a TTY: https://github.com/Scribery/tlog/issues/227
.. _file bugs: https://simp-project.atlassian.net
.. _upstream bug in the incron package: https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1656939
