.. _changelog-6.3.0:

SIMP Community Edition (CE) 6.3.0-0
===================================

.. raw:: pdf

  PageBreak

.. contents::
  :depth: 2

.. raw:: pdf

  PageBreak

This release is known to work with:

  * CentOS 6.10 x86_64
  * CentOS 7.0 1804 x86_64
  * OEL 6.10 x86_64
  * OEL 7.5 x86_64
  * RHEL 6.10 x86_64
  * RHEL 7.5 x86_64

The flagship feature for SIMP 6.3.0 is full compatibility with Puppet 5 and
Hiera 5.

The versions of Puppet targeted are those delivered with Puppet Enterprise
2018:

  * Puppet Server: 5.3.X
  * Puppet Agent:  5.5.X

A much wider range of versions is used for unit and acceptance testing.  See
the ``.gitlab_ci.yml`` file in each module to see what versions it has been tested
against.

.. WARNING::

   Puppet 4 is no longer supported as of SIMP 6.3. Users can continue with the
   SIMP 6.2 release and can obtain commercial support if further Puppet 4
   support is required.

   From this point on, all components are tested againt Puppet 5 and Puppet 4
   support may be removed from any module as a non-breaking change at any time.

6.3.0-0 Errata
--------------

An `upstream bug in the incron package`_, caused the
``pupmod::master::generate_types`` code to spin into an infinite loop if the
``incron`` package was updated to ``0.5.12-6`` as published in :term:`EPEL`.

This bug affects **all uses of incron**, not just
``pupmod::master::generate_types``. We strongly advise that you remove the
``0.5.12-6`` package from your upstream repositories and use the following
Hiera configuration to ensure that your SIMP ``6.3.0-0`` installation does not
upgrade.

.. code-block:: yaml

   ---
   yum::config_options:
     exclude="incron"

.. WARNING::

   If you previously disabled ``pupmod::master::generate_types`` then be
   advised that you will need to manually run ``puppet generate types`` on your
   environments if you upgrade the ``puppet`` or ``puppetserver`` packages or
   if you add a new environment to your system.

   See the :ref:`faq-puppet-generate_types` for additional information.

Breaking Changes
----------------

Upgrading from Puppet 4 and earlier versions of :term:`Hiera` requires some
preparation. Please be sure to read :ref:`ug-upgrade-simp` carefully.

While :term:`Hiera` 5 is fully compatible with Hiera 3, there have been some
configuration changes to utilize new capabilities.

* The ``/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/hiera.yaml`` file, which defines the hierarchy
  used to search for parameter values, has been moved to the environment level
  to utilize the ability to have a unique ``hiera.yaml`` configuration per
  environment.
* The default data directory has been renamed from ``hieradata`` to  ``data``
  to match Hiera 5 conventions.

You should review the puppet documentation for `upgrading to Hiera 5`_ to learn
how to upgrade any custom modules or backends that you have created.

.. _upgrading to Hiera 5: https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/5.5/hiera_migrate.html


Significant Updates
-------------------

The following items were removed as dependencies for the ``simp`` RPM and added
as dependencies on the ``simp-extras`` RPM since they are not used by the
default SIMP configuration:

* pupmod-richardc-datacat
* pupmod-simp-autofs
* pupmod-simp-krb5
* pupmod-simp-network

puppet-simp-tlog
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

:term:`Sudosh` has been replaced by :term:`Tlog` as the default for logging
privileged user activities.  The default command for a user to switch to
privileged access is now:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo su - root

Package Installation Settings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Several of the SIMP modules have been updated to use the
``simp_options::package_ensure`` setting as the default for package resource
ensure state.  The default for ``simp_options::package_ensure`` is `installed`.
This will change the default behavior of some modules that were previously
hard-coded to `latest`. This will not affect anything that was explicitly set.

This change makes the SIMP modules consistent and allows the administrator to
set the default across the system with one variable.  Also, by setting the
default to `installed` packages will be updated only if the administrator has
explicitly set the variable to `latest`.

.. NOTE::

   This does **not** affect the nightly cron job that updates all packages on
   the system and it is recommended that you change this to ``latest`` and rely
   on prudent repository management.

   See :ref:`ug-sa-ga-nightly-updates` for additional information.

The following modules were updated:

* pupmod-simp-aide
* pupmod-simp-auditd
* pupmod-simp-clamav
* pupmod-simp-dhcp
* pupmod-simp-fips
* pupmod-simp-iptables
* pupmod-simp-krb5
* pupmod-simp-mozilla
* pupmod-simp-oddjob
* pupmod-simp-openscap
* pupmod-simp-rsync
* pupmod-simp-rsyslog
* pupmod-simp-simp_apache
* pupmod-simp-simp_nfs
* pupmod-simp-simp_openldap
* pupmod-simp-ssh
* pupmod-simp-sudo
* pupmod-simp-sudosh
* pupmod-simp-tcpwrappers
* pupmod-simp-tuned
* pupmod-simp-vnc
* pupmod-simp-vsftpd
* pupmod-simp-xinetd

Oracle Enterprise Linux
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The testing of the modules on Oracle Enterprise Linux was expanded and
automated.

RPM Updates
-----------

ELG Stack
^^^^^^^^^

The application RPMs for :term:`Elasticsearch`, :term:`Logstash`, and
:term:`Grafana` will no longer be delivered with the SIMP ISO.
Updates in the same major version of Elasticsearch and Logstash have been shown
to randomly corrupt data and are therefore too dangerous to potentially drop
into upstream repositories by default. Users must now download their own
:term:`ELG` packages.

Removed Modules
---------------

pupmod-simp-freeradius
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There was not enough time to get the ``freeradius`` components updated
sufficiently for Puppet 5 prior to release. This module may reappear in
future releases if there is significant demand.

Security Announcements
----------------------

None

Fixed Bugs
----------

pupmod-simp-auditd
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Reverted back to using the native service provider for the auditd service
* Allowed users to opt-out of hooking the audit dispatchers into the SIMP rsyslog
  module using `auditd::config::audisp::syslog::rsyslog = false` or,
  alternatively, setting `simp_options::syslog = false`.
* Added a `write_logs` option to the `auditd_class` and multiplex between the
  `log_format = NOLOG` setting and `write_logs = false` since there were
  breaking changes in these settings after `auditd` version `2.6.0`.
* Added support for `log_format = ENHANCED` for `auditd` version >= `2.6.0`.
  Older versions will simply fall back to `RAW`.
* Removed unnecessary dependencies from metadata.json.  Now, when users install
  auditd stand-alone i.e. `puppet module install`, they will not have
  extraneous modules clutter their environment.

pupmod-simp-nfs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Allowed users to set the 'ensure' state of their client mount points in
  case they don't want them to be mounted by default.

pupmod-simp-rsyslogd
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Updated templates to use RainerScript for rsyslogd V8 and later
* Fixed the MainMsgQueueDiscardMark and MainMsgQueueWorkerThreads
  parameters
* Updated rsyslog::rule::remote to select a more intelligent default
  for StreamDriverPermittedPeers when TLS is enabled.  This improvement
  fixes the bug in which forwarding of logs to servers in different domains
  was not possible within one call.
* Added logic to properly handle rsyslogd parameters for V8.6 and later
  as documented in CentOS 7.5 Release notes.  These include moving -x and -w
  options to global.conf and issuing deprecation warning for -l and -s
  options.

pupmod-simp-simp_grafana
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Fixed bug in resource ordering of pki::copy and grafana::service
* Used simplib::passgen() in lieu of deprecated passgen()

pupmod-simp-simp_logstash
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Workaround for upstream bug where OEL6 logstash::service_provider must
  be set.

pupmod-simp-simp_rsyslog
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Made directory where logs are gathered configurable and make rules that organize
  them configurable.
* Updated simp_rsyslog::forward to allow configuration of the
  StreamDriverPermittedPeers directive in the forwarding rule actions
  for the remote rsyslog servers.  This allows the user to set the correct
  StreamDriverPermittedPeers value when the default value is incorrect
  (e.g., when IP addresses are used in simp_rsyslog::log_servers or
  simp_rsyslog::failover_servers and one or more of those servers
  is not in the same domain as the client).
* Removed redundant rules for sudosh since the puppet module will correctly take
  care of adding those rules.
* Added support for tlog since it will be commonly replacing sudosh across the
  SIMP infrastructure.

pupmod-simp-simplib
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Fixed bug where uid_min would throw errors under operating systems
  without /etc/login.defs.
* Fixed bug where simplib_sysctl would throw an undefined method error
  on non-Linux OS's.  (both those with sysctl (MacOS X) and without (Windows))
* Fixed bug  with the `boot_dir_uuid` fact where it would throw an error if running
  on a system without a `/boot` partition (like a container).
* Ensure that reboot_notify updates resources based on a modified 'reason'

pupmod-simp-ssh
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Hardened all ssh_host_* keys for security and compliance

pupmod-simp-sudo
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Enabled support for Default of `cmnd` type in sudoers file.

pupmod-simp-svckill
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Added 7.5 RHEL services to svckill::ignore_defaults list for EL7.

rubygem_simp_cli
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Updated 'simp config' to support environment-specific :term:`Hiera` 5
  configuration provided by SIMP-6.3.0.

  - Assumes a legacy Hiera 3 configuration, when the 'simp'
    environment only contains a 'hieradata' directory.
  - Assumes a Hiera 5 configuration configuration, when the 'simp'
    environment contains both a 'hiera.yaml' file and a 'data/'

* Fixed `simp bootstrap` errors in puppetserver 5+:

  - No longer overwrites `web-routes.conf` (fix fatal config errors)
  - No longer adds `-XX:MaxPermSize` for Java >= 8 (fix warnings)

* The `trusted_server_facts` was removed in Puppet 5.0.0.
  The presence of this setting will cause each puppet run to emit the warning:

      Warning: Setting trusted_server_facts is deprecated.

  This patch causes `simp config` to quietly remove the setting if it is present
  and Puppet is version 5 or later.

New Features
------------

pupmod-simp-x2go and pupmod-simp-mate
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These modules are used to configure the x2go client and server to allow for
remote access to desktops and servers. This is an alternative to VNC. An
example configuration is documented in the
:ref:`ug-howto-graphical_remote_access` documentation.

pupmod-simp-tlog
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This module configures :term:`Tlog` for logging privileged user activities.
Both :term:`sudosh` and Tlog are currently available but sudosh is no longer
being maintained and is expected to be deprecated in the future.

pupmod-simp-simp_pki_service
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. WARNING::

   This is a technology preview and may break unexpectedly in the future

Traditionally, SIMP has used an internal "FakeCA" `openssl`-based CA. Over
time, this has proven insufficient for our needs, particularly for capabilities
in terms of Key Enrollment (SCEP and CMC), OCSP, and overall management of
certificates.

Additionally, it was found that users wanted to adjust the certificate
parameters for the Puppet subsystem itself outside of the defaults and/or use a
"real", and more scalable CA system for all certificate management.

The pupmod-simp-simp_pki_service module  can be used to configure a
Certificate Authority (CA) using the Dogtag server.  This CA can be configured
either for the puppet server CA, the site CA in lieu of FakeCA, or both.

See the README in the module for details on how to configure it.

The Dogtag server was chosen because it is part of the FreeIPA suite and
therefore likely to have any issues fixed and be well supported.


Known Bugs
----------

Upgrading from previous SIMP 6.X versions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are known issues when upgrading from Puppet 4 to Puppet 5.  Make sure you
read the :ref:`ug-upgrade-simp` before attempting an upgrade.

Tlog
^^^^

Tlog currently has `a bug where session information may not be logged`_. The
immediate mitigation to this is the fact that `pam_tty_audit` is the primary
mode of auditing with ``tlog`` and/or ``sudosh`` being in place for a better
overall tracking and behavior analysis experience.

Tlog has `a second bug where the application fails if a user does not have a TTY`_.
This has been mitigated by the SIMP wrapper script simply bypassing ``tlog`` if
a TTY is not present.


.. _a bug where session information may not be logged: https://github.com/Scribery/tlog/issues/228
.. _a second bug where the application fails if a user does not have a TTY: https://github.com/Scribery/tlog/issues/227
.. _file bugs: https://simp-project.atlassian.net
.. _upstream bug in the incron package: https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1656939
